\thispagestyle{empty}

\setcounter{page}{0}

# Introduction

## Overview

Coupled Harmonic Oscillator Network (CHON) is a real-time, interactive application for generating sonic gestures and textures using a simulation of a physical dynamical system as a musical interface. The physical system is a network of particles connected by a spring-like force. The user sets the system into motion by displacing a particle, which causes a chain reaction governed by Newtonian mechanics. The user can intervene in the evolving system, dragging and moving particles at will. The system generates complex yet tangible control data that can be used to drive parameters for sound synthesis and other purposes.

CHON is part of a larger interest of mine in using physical metaphor in music. I have previously used intuitive and algorithmic methods to express physical metaphor in my music. CHON represents a hybrid approach, allowing intuitive interaction with the algorithmically generated simulation in real-time. The musical gestures that CHON can create are chaotic, but they seem nonetheless intelligible because of their connection to the physical world.

The coupled harmonic oscillator is a fundamental model in physics that has applications in many areas of research. It is an extension of the simple harmonic oscillator, which can be represented by a mass on a spring. The simple harmonic oscillator moves sinusoidally, but when coupled via a spring-like force to another harmonic oscillator (or many), complex superpositions of sinusoidal waves emerge. CHON goes further, allowing the masses in the coupled harmonic oscillator network to move in 3 dimensions and to be arranged in a 2-dimensional grid.

The application is written in C++ and uses the Allolib framework extensively. It is open source[^1], under a GPLv3 license, and runs on Linux, MacOS, and Windows. It uses an explicit numerical method to solve the discretized equations of motion of the particles.

[^1]: The source code can be accessed at [https://github.com/rodneydup/CHON](https://github.com/rodneydup/CHON)

The visual interface is a 3D rendering of the particle system. The user interacts directly with the particles in the visual simulation using a computer mouse. A 2D graph can also be displayed which visualizes the displacement of each particle along a given axis. CHON has an internal synthesis engine that allows the user to sonify the movement of the particles. The instrument also generates a stream of OSC data from each particle, making it a versatile tool for generating up to 100 control signals that are linked by physical laws.

I have used CHON to generate sounds using the internal sound engine as well as using the OSC data it broadcasts to control external synthesis and notation software. For example, I used CHON to write a score for two pianists. The piece, *Pandæmonium*, was premiered by HOCKET in August 2020.

I am still exploring the musical possibilities afforded by CHON, and the possibilities of extending and improving CHON. I will discuss some of these future directions at the end of this paper.

## Related work

Physical modeling is a massive interdisciplinary field of research spanning industrial, scientific, and artistic applications. In music, the vast majority of physical modeling is used for re-synthesizing believable facsimiles of real instruments[@modartt_pianoteq_nodate][@arturia_v-collection_nodate]. The same technology that allows these recreations has also been applied to create fantastical virtual instruments of unreal proportions or configurations[@eckel_sound_1995][@aas_aasinstruments_nodate]. The first example of physical modeling synthesis of instruments was demonstrated in 1971 by Hiller and Ruiz[@hiller_synthesizing_1971]. Today, physical modeling synthesis, driven by increasingly powerful computers, can achieve very convincing results. On the other hand, physical modeling interfaces often suffer from problems of control and complexity; the high number of parameters in a given simulation may be overwhelming for performance purposes[@roads_computer_1996, 288][@smith_iii_physical_1996].

There are many approaches to the design of systems for physical modeling synthesis including modal synthesis, waveguide schemes, source-filter models, and mass-spring methods[@valimaki_discrete-time_2006]. CHON falls into the realm of mass-spring methods. Mass-spring methods use Newtonian mechanics to simulate the dynamics of particles with mass and inertia connected by spring-like forces[@roads_computer_1996, 271]. This is the type of simulation that drives CHON.

The goal of most mass-spring applications is to simulate a physical body that can be described as a network of coupled masses. This, like every physical model, is a simplification of reality. Nevertheless, many types of physical bodies fit well into this model. The mass-spring model does a good job at representing the way that waves propagate through solid media such as strings and vibrating surfaces (like drums). The mass-spring model suffers from scalability issues, however. The cost of computation can increase quickly as more particles are used in a given simulation. Considering that physical modeling synthesis often needs to run at audio rate (updating 44,100 times per second) and that higher particle density generally results in a more realistic simulation, this is a difficult problem.

The focus of most mass-spring simulations is on the object that the system simulates. In other words, the aim is that the gestalt of the movements of the particles generates sound that resembles the sound of the object being modeled. This is where CHON differs from other mass-spring applications (and indeed the majority of physical modeling synthesis projects in general). Rather than create a sound object from an amalgam of particle interactions, CHON was designed with the goal of exploring interconnected particles as sound objects unto themselves. I am also interested in larger-scale gestures, phrases, and forms that can arise from the overlapping undulations of the coupled particles, but the foundation of CHON remains the individual sound-particles themselves.

Claude Cadoz and others at ACROE (Association pour la Création et la Recherche sur les Outils d’Expression) in Grenoble pioneered the use of the mass-spring model in physical modeling synthesis and musical creation. They generalized mass-spring models into what they call a *mass-interaction scheme*, where, in addition to more standard mass-spring situations, particles may be lumped into strange configurations and the forces connecting them may be non-linear[@cadoz_cordis-anima_1993]. ACROE's CORDIS-ANIMA system was one of the first digital synthesis applications for physical modeling, paving the way for future research. CORDIS-ANIMA is a sophisticated and technical modular system for simulation and sonification/visualization of mass-interaction models[@cadoz_cordis-anima_1993]. In CORDIS-ANIMA, the user can specify many physical parameters of each particle, including how and which particles are coupled to each other, their initial position and velocity, their mass, whether they are fixed or can move. Once this is configured, the user and then set the simulation into motion and they can watch and hear the results.

After decades of development, CORDIS-ANIMA is a massive software and one can pay to attend courses at ACROE to use and learn it. CHON is lean by comparison, but a user can download it and set it into motion and sound in less than two minutes. With a little more time, one can connect CHON to other audio software or hardware and begin exploring its full potential. My focus with CHON is to make it approachable. Even as I continue to add refinements and features, I will make sure the default use case of CHON is intuitive and immediately expressive.

Beyond sound synthesis, some researchers have recognized the potential for physical modeling in computer-assisted composition[@vinjar_bending_2021][@cadoz_physical_2002]
[@chafe_case_2011]. Claude Cadoz wrote a piece called *pico..Tera* using the CORDIS-ANIMA and GENESIS systems[@cadoz_physical_2002]. In documenting the work, he spoke of the "instrument" and "instrumentalists" that were programmed in the system. Essentially there are virtual actors that excite an instrument in the CORDIS-ANIMA simulation. His description reveals an intricate sequence of events programmed in the system like a Rube Goldberg machine made from thousands of particles and dozens of larger-scale structures. Indeed, his stated purpose was to demonstrate the possibility of enacting an entire piece of music in a physically modeled simulation without intervention during the execution and without post-treatment.

Like Cadoz, I am interested in the possibilities of physical modeling beyond the synthesis of individual sounds, extending physical model methods to computer-aided composition[@castagne_10_2003]. CHON can be set into motion to create an infinite cascade of sound events. Certain configurations can produce quite complex results, but CHON surely can not hope to approach the diversity of programmed situations that Cadoz achieved with CORDIS-ANIMA in *pico..Tera*. CHON is a specialized case of highly interactive coupled mass systems in string-like and surface-like arrangements. Unlike the scripted system that defines *pico..Tera*, CHON is meant to be tampered with, interrupted, performed on, broken, energized, and generally manipulated by the user. Thus CHON benefits from the physical plausibility of connected sound events that Cadoz' methods provide, while also allowing for the rich and impulsive dimension of human intervention.

CHON is free, open-source, and easy to find and download on GitHub. This accessibility is at the heart of all of my projects. Unfortunately, I could not find any way to hear *pico..Tera*. Nor could I find any way to buy or download CORDIS-ANIMA. There are some projects that implement aspects of CORDIS-ANIMA in other platforms and programming languages. Mark Pearson's Tao system[@pearson_tao_1996] and Cyrille Henry's PMPD pure data objects[@henry_pmpd_2004] are some early examples. Tao uses a scripting language as its interface and is non-real-time. PMPD allows for some real-time control and being in the pure data environment gives it significant flexibility. Mi-creative, an initiative founded by Jérôme Villeneuve and James Leonard, has some nice open-source tools inspired CORDIS-ANIMA[@villeneuve_mi-creative_nodate]. These projects are flexible and powerful, but they all require a certain level of programming expertise to use. By comparison, CHON is more approachable for the non-specialist computer musician.

